Initial Ref doc version (#89)
GoogleCloudPlatform/google-cloud-spanner-hibernate: docs/src/main/asciidoc/spanner.adoc

=== Quick Set-Up

Maven coordinates for the dialect:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.google.cloud</groupId>
  <artifactId>google-cloud-spanner-hibernate-dialect</artifactId>
  <version> TBD </version>
</dependency>
----

Maven coordinates for the official Cloud Spanner Driver:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.google.cloud</groupId>
  <artifactId>google-cloud-spanner</artifactId>
  <version> TBD </version>
</dependency>
----

Configuring the `SpannerDialect` and a Cloud Spanner Driver class is typical of all Hibernate dialects in the `hibernate.properties` file:

----
hibernate.dialect=com.google.cloud.spanner.hibernate.SpannerDialect
hibernate.connection.driver_class=com.google.cloud.spanner.jdbc.JdbcDriver
hibernate.connection.url=jdbc:cloudspanner:/projects/{INSERT_PROJECT_ID}/instances/{INSERT_INSTANCE_ID}/databases/{INSERT_DATABASE_ID}
----

The service account JSON credentials file's location should be in the `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS` environment variable.

The dialect and driver are compatible with all values (`create`, `create-drop`, and `update`) of the `hibernate.hbm2ddl.auto` setting.

> === Spanner Dialect

Reviewer: I think it might be nice to just have a specific section or table of unsupported features. Currently, you kind of have to sift through the page to find what is not supported.

==== Relationships

The dialect supports all of the standard relational annotations:

- `@OneToOne`
- `@OneToMany`
- `@ManyToOne`
- `@ManyToMany`

These can be used via `@JoinTable` or `@JoinColumn`.
However, because Cloud Spanner does not support Foreign Keys, foreign-key-columns are just regular columns in Cloud Spanner.

NOTE: The lack of foreign keys also means database-side cascading deletes are not supported via the `@OnDelete(action = OnDeleteAction.CASCADE)` annotation because there is no `ON DELETE CASCADE` constraint in Cloud Spanner DDL.
However, Hibernate-side cascading operations such as `@ManyToOne(cascade = {CascadeType.ALL})` are supported.

==== Constraints

Cloud Spanner does not support constraints.
As a result, `SpannerDialect` does not currently support any constraints such as `FOREIGN KEY`, `UNIQUE`, or `ON DELETE CASCADE`.

NOTE: Hibernate doesn't directly rely on the existence of constraints to perform its operations and leaves the enforcement relationship links to the database.

==== Collections

> `SpannerDialect` supports collection properties annotated with `@ElementCollection`.

Reviewer: Presumably anything that is not mentioned as unsupported, would be supported by the dialect.

However, as with inter-object-relationships, foreign-key-columns in collection tables do not have the Foreign Key constraint.

==== Table Catalogs and Schemas

Cloud Spanner does not support table names with Catalog and Schema components:

[source, java]
----
// Not supported: `public.store.book` is not a valid Cloud Spanner table name.
@Table(
  catalog = "public",
  schema = "store",
  name = "book"
)

// Supported.
@Table(
  name = "book"
)
----

==== @ColumnDefault

The dialect does not currently set default values based on the https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/5.4/javadocs/org/hibernate/annotations/ColumnDefault.html[`@ColumnDefault`] annotation,

> because `null` values aren't specially handled and are stored just like other values by Cloud Spanner and its driver.

Reviewer: I guess another way to say it that Spanner does not support default column values, and hence the dialect doesn't support `@ColumnDefault`.

==== Decimal and Numeric Types

Cloud Spanner does not provide native support for https://cloud.google.com/spanner/docs/storing-numeric-data[arbitrary-precision decimal numbers], but does provide some alternative approaches.
As a result, the driver and dialect do not support decimal and arbitrary-precision Java types that Hibernate maps to Java Persistence types `java.sql.Type` of `NUMERIC` and `DECIMAL` such as `java.math.BigDecimal`.

==== Subclasses using `InheritanceType.JOINED`

If you are using entities that are related by inheritance with the `@Inheritance(strategy = InheritanceType.JOINED)`:

[source, java]
----
@Entity
@Inheritance(strategy = InheritanceType.JOINED)
public class Payment {

    @Id
    @GeneratedValue
    private Long id;

    private Long amount;
}

@Entity
public class WireTransferPayment extends Payment {
}

@Entity
public class CreditCardPayment extends Payment {
}
----

You must set the `hibernate.hql.bulk_id_strategy` setting in `hibernate.properties` to one of the following classes:

- `InlineIdsInClauseBulkIdStrategy`
- `InlineIdsSubSelectValueListBulkIdStrategy`
- `InlineIdsOrClauseBulkIdStrategy`
- `CteValuesListBulkIdStrategy`

> This is because Hibernate's default behavior attempts to create intermediate tables to handle delete and update operations on the multiple tables that represent a `JOINED` inheritance hierarchy, but these table creations statements do not conform to Cloud Spanner DDL.

Reviewer: Is there a class name for the default strategy that you can call out here?

Using one of the `Inline` bulk-ID strategy classes given above resolves this issue.

> 

Reviewer: I think the section about UUID generation and caveats around that is missing.

Author: @meltsufin added a new section and table as requested, PTAL

However, Hibernate-side cascading operations such as `@ManyToOne(cascade = {CascadeType.ALL})` are supported.

==== Constraints

Cloud Spanner does not support constraints.
As a result, `SpannerDialect` does not currently support any constraints such as `FOREIGN KEY`, `UNIQUE`, or `ON DELETE CASCADE`.

NOTE: Hibernate doesn't directly rely on the existence of constraints to perform its operations and leaves the enforcement relationship links to the database.

The lack of the foreign key constraint affects relationships and collection properties annotated with `@ElementCollection`.

==== Generated IDs

Hibernate's `@GeneratedValue` annotation for `long` properties is supported but not recommended:
[source, java]
----
@Entity
public class Employee {

  @Id
  @GeneratedValue
  public Long id;
}
----

This results in sequential IDs that are https://cloud.google.com/spanner/docs/schema-and-data-model#primary_keys[not optimal for Cloud Spanner] and requires locking of the `hibernate_sequence` table for inserts.

> You can use locally-generated UUID key values instead:

Reviewer 2: Gotcha, or maybe write "you should" then? I feel like it should convey notion that this is a recommended practice rather than a workaround.

> You can use locally-generated UUID key values instead:

Author: done

= Hibernate for Google Cloud Spanner

> This is a dialect compatible with https://hibernate.org/orm/releases/5.4/[Hibernate 5.4] for the Google Cloud Spanner database service.

Reviewer: Make "Google Cloud Spanner" a link as well.

Author: done

The `SpannerDialect` produces SQL, DML, and DDL statements for most common entity types and relationships using standard Hibernate and Java Persistence annotations.

> Please see the following sections for important details and differences due to Cloud Spanner's features and data model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please see the following sections for important details about dialect differences due to the unique features and limitations of Cloud Spanner.
```

=== Quick Set-Up

Maven coordinates for the dialect:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.google.cloud</groupId>
  <artifactId>google-cloud-spanner-hibernate-dialect</artifactId>
  <version> TBD </version>
</dependency>
----

Maven coordinates for the official Cloud Spanner Driver:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.google.cloud</groupId>
  <artifactId>google-cloud-spanner</artifactId>
  <version> TBD </version>
</dependency>
----

Configuring the `SpannerDialect` and a Cloud Spanner Driver class is typical of all Hibernate dialects in the `hibernate.properties` file:

----
hibernate.dialect=com.google.cloud.spanner.hibernate.SpannerDialect
hibernate.connection.driver_class=com.google.cloud.spanner.jdbc.JdbcDriver
hibernate.connection.url=jdbc:cloudspanner:/projects/{INSERT_PROJECT_ID}/instances/{INSERT_INSTANCE_ID}/databases/{INSERT_DATABASE_ID}
----

> The https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/getting-started[service account JSON credentials] file's location should be in the `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/getting-started[service account JSON credentials] file location should be in the `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS` environment variable.
```

The driver will use default credentials set in the Google Cloud SDK `gcloud` application otherwise.

The dialect and driver are compatible with all values (`create`, `create-drop`, and `update`) of the `hibernate.hbm2ddl.auto` setting.

=== Spanner Dialect

The `SpannerDialect` supports most of the standard Hibernate and Java Persistence annotations but there are important differences in features because of differences in https://cloud.google.com/spanner/docs/schema-and-data-model[Cloud Spanner's data model] from traditional SQL databases.

These are unsupported features in the Cloud Spanner Hibernate Dialect.
Please see the following sections for details:
[options="header"]
|===
| Unsupported Feature | Description
| Constraints | No support for `FOREIGN KEY`, `UNIQUE`, or `ON DELETE CASCADE`. Cloud Spanner does not enforce relationship links outside of Hibernate.

> | Catalog and schema in table names | Tables names cannot contain periods or other punctuation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Catalog and schema scoping for table names | Tables name references cannot contain periods or other punctuation.
```

| Column default values | Cloud Spanner treats `null` like any other value and it gets no special handling.

> | Big-decimal or arbitrary-precision numbers | Cloud Spanner does not support `java.sql` types of `NUMERIC` or `DECIMAL`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Big-decimal or arbitrary-precision numbers | The dialect does not support `java.math.BigDecimal` because Cloud Spanner doesn't have SQL `NUMERIC` or `DECIMAL` support.
```

|===

==== Relationships

> The dialect supports all of the standard relational annotations:

Reviewer: I think:
```suggestion
The dialect supports all of the standard entity relationships:
```

- `@OneToOne`
- `@OneToMany`
- `@ManyToOne`
- `@ManyToMany`

These can be used via `@JoinTable` or `@JoinColumn`.

> However, because Cloud Spanner does not support Foreign Keys, foreign-key-columns are just regular columns in Cloud Spanner.

Reviewer: I think it's worth emphasizing that Spanner does support foreign keys, it just doesn't support foreign key **constraints**.
```suggestion
However, because Cloud Spanner does not support foreign key constraints, foreign-key-columns are just regular columns in Cloud Spanner.
```

> NOTE: The lack of foreign keys also means database-side cascading deletes are not supported via the `@OnDelete(action = OnDeleteAction.CASCADE)` annotation because there is no `ON DELETE CASCADE` constraint in Cloud Spanner DDL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The lack of foreign key constraints also means database-side cascading deletes are not supported via the `@OnDelete(action = OnDeleteAction.CASCADE)` annotation because there is no `ON DELETE CASCADE` constraint in Cloud Spanner DDL.
```

However, Hibernate-side cascading operations such as `@ManyToOne(cascade = {CascadeType.ALL})` are supported.

==== Constraints

> Cloud Spanner does not support constraints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cloud Spanner does not support database constraints.
```

As a result, `SpannerDialect` does not currently support any constraints such as `FOREIGN KEY`, `UNIQUE`, or `ON DELETE CASCADE`.

> NOTE: Hibernate doesn't directly rely on the existence of constraints to perform its operations and leaves the enforcement relationship links to the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Hibernate doesn't directly rely on the existence of constraints to perform its operations and leaves the enforcement of relationship links to the database.
```

The lack of the foreign key constraint affects relationships and collection properties annotated with `@ElementCollection`.

==== Generated IDs

Hibernate's `@GeneratedValue` annotation for `long` properties is supported but not recommended:
[source, java]
----
@Entity
public class Employee {

  @Id

>   @GeneratedValue

Reviewer: In case someone is just copy-pasting code:
```suggestion
  @GeneratedValue // DON'T DO THIS, IT'S SLOW
```

  public Long id;
}
----

This results in sequential IDs that are https://cloud.google.com/spanner/docs/schema-and-data-model#primary_keys[not optimal for Cloud Spanner] and requires locking of the `hibernate_sequence` table for inserts.

You should use locally-generated UUID key values instead:
[source, java]
----
@Entity
public class Employee {

  @Id
  @GeneratedValue(strategy = GenerationType.AUTO)
  @Type(type="uuid-char")
  public UUID id;
}
----

The `@Type(type="uuid-char")` annotation specifies that this UUID value will be stored in Cloud Spanner as a `STRING` column.
Leaving out this annotation causes a `BYTES` column to be used.

==== Table Catalogs and Schemas

> Cloud Spanner does not support table names with Catalog and Schema components:

Reviewer: why the capitalization?
```suggestion
Cloud Spanner does not support table names with catalog and schema components:
```

[source, java]
----

> // Not supported: `public.store.book` is not a valid Cloud Spanner table name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Not supported: `public.store.book` is not a valid Cloud Spanner table name reference.
```

@Table(
  catalog = "public",
  schema = "store",
  name = "book"
)

// Supported.
@Table(
  name = "book"
)
----

==== Column Default Values

The dialect does not currently set default values based on the https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/5.4/javadocs/org/hibernate/annotations/ColumnDefault.html[`@ColumnDefault`] annotation,

> because `null` values aren't specially handled and are stored just like other values by Cloud Spanner and its driver.

Reviewer: As far as databases are concerned, normally its all caps NULL.
```suggestion
because `NULL` values aren't specially handled and are stored just like other values by Cloud Spanner and its driver.
```

==== Decimal and Numeric Types

> Cloud Spanner does not provide native support for https://cloud.google.com/spanner/docs/storing-numeric-data[arbitrary-precision decimal numbers], but does provide some alternative approaches.

Reviewer: If we're going to mention alternative approaches, then we have to describe them. Otherwise, let's just omit that part.

```suggestion
Cloud Spanner does not provide native support for https://cloud.google.com/spanner/docs/storing-numeric-data[arbitrary-precision decimal numbers], such as `NUMERIC` and `DECIMAL`.
```

> As a result, the driver and dialect do not support decimal and arbitrary-precision Java types that Hibernate maps to Java Persistence types `java.sql.Type` of `NUMERIC` and `DECIMAL` such as `java.math.BigDecimal`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, the driver and dialect do not support decimal and arbitrary-precision Java types such as `java.math.BigInteger` and `java.math.BigDecimal`.
```

==== Subclasses using `InheritanceType.JOINED`

If you are using entities that are related by inheritance with the `@Inheritance(strategy = InheritanceType.JOINED)`:

[source, java]
----
@Entity
@Inheritance(strategy = InheritanceType.JOINED)
public class Payment {

    @Id
    @GeneratedValue
    private Long id;

    private Long amount;
}

@Entity
public class WireTransferPayment extends Payment {
}

@Entity
public class CreditCardPayment extends Payment {
}
----

You must set the `hibernate.hql.bulk_id_strategy` setting in `hibernate.properties` to one of the following classes:

- `InlineIdsInClauseBulkIdStrategy`
- `InlineIdsSubSelectValueListBulkIdStrategy`
- `InlineIdsOrClauseBulkIdStrategy`
- `CteValuesListBulkIdStrategy`

> This is because Hibernate's default behavior (`PersistentTableBulkIdStrategy`) attempts to create intermediate tables to handle delete and update operations on the multiple tables that represent a `JOINED` inheritance hierarchy, but these table creations statements do not conform to Cloud Spanner DDL.

Reviewer: BTW, can we define our own strategy and use it? Like a modified `PersistentTableBulkIdStrategy` that actually works?

Author: For what purpose? The 4 alternatives cover the bases pretty well.

Author: Ooh do you mean basically just modify it so it uses the our DDL -generating-code ? yea we could look into that.

Author: #90
